Bug 2026489: add runbook for ThanosRuleEvaluationLatencyHigh Alert (#35)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/ThanosRuleEvaluationLatencyHigh.md

# ThanosRuleEvaluationLatencyHigh

## Meaning

> The [Thanos Ruler][1] is deployed when user workload monitoring is enabled. It
> allows alerting rules deployed as part of user workload monitoring to query
> both the Prometheus instance responsible for cluster components as well the
> user-workload Prometheus instance. This alert is triggered when the
> Thanos Ruler takes longer time to evaluate the alert.

Reviewer: I'd keep the description shorter and avoid mentioning that Thanos Ruler queries both platform and UWM prometheus.

```suggestion
The alert fires when Thanos Ruler misses rule evaluations due to slow rule group processing. The alert is only about the user-defined recording and alerting rules.
```

## Impact

Alerts will take longer time to get delivered.

## Diagnosis

Check the logs for the Thanos Ruler pods:

```console
oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring logs -l 'thanos-ruler=user-workload'
-c thanos-ruler
```

Check the logs for the Thanos Querier pods:

```console
oc -n openshift-monitoring logs -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=thanos-query'
-c thanos-query
```

This alert will trigger when the rule evaluation take more time than
the scheduled interval. It can indicate that your query backend
(i.e Thanos Querier) takes too much time to evaluate the query. If there is
even a single rule that is taking too long (more than the interval for that
group) to evaluate, this alert will fire. This might indicate other problems
like slow StoreAPIs or too complex query expression in rule.

> ## Mitigation

Reviewer: I would mention a few more things:
* verify if resource limits are set on the different monitoring components and whether they are throttled.
* Audit the rule groups that fire the alert to identify expensive queries
* Consider splitting the rule groups into smaller groups if possible.

# ThanosRuleEvaluationLatencyHigh

## Meaning

The alert fires when Thanos Ruler misses rule evaluations due to slow rule

> group processing.The alert is only about the user-defined recording and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
group processing. The alert is only about the user-defined recording and
```

alerting rules.

## Impact

Alerts will take longer time to get delivered.

## Diagnosis

Check the logs for the Thanos Ruler pods:

```console
oc -n openshift-user-workload-monitoring logs -l 'thanos-ruler=user-workload'
-c thanos-ruler

> ```

Reviewer 2: line 18 - 19 should be in the same line

Author: Thank you, I updated to have `\` at end of line, due to lint checks not possible to have more than 80 characters on one line

Check the logs for the Thanos Querier pods:

```console
oc -n openshift-monitoring logs -l 'app.kubernetes.io/name=thanos-query'
-c thanos-query

> ```

Reviewer 2: line 25 - 26 should be in the same line

> This alert will trigger when the rule evaluation take more time than

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This alert will trigger when the rule evaluation takes more time than
```

> the scheduled interval. It can indicate that your query backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the configured interval. It can indicate that your query backend
```

(i.e Thanos Querier) takes too much time to evaluate the query. If there is
even a single rule that is taking too long (more than the interval for that
group) to evaluate, this alert will fire. This might indicate other problems
like slow StoreAPIs or too complex query expression in rule.

## Mitigation

> - Most likely scenario is a misconfiguration causing the user workload

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The most likely scenario is a misconfiguration, causing the user workload
```

  monitoring stack to overload Thanos Ruler with duplicate or otherwise
  erroneous alerts

- Audit the rule groups that fire the alert to identify expensive queries and
  consider splitting the rule groups into smaller groups if possible

- Verify if resource limits are set on the different monitoring components and
  whether they are throttled

> - Check if any connectivity issues to thanos storeAPI service from
>   thanos-querier pod logs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Check if any of the configured thanos-querier storeAPI endpoints
  have connectivity issues
```
